---


---

<h2 id="smart-card-commands--apdu">Smart card commands : APDU</h2>
<p>The communication between a smart card and the “outer world” is acheived by means of simple commands called APDU (Application Protocol Data Unit).</p>
<p>An APDU encodes an instructions transmitted to the smart card. Essencially, an apdu is a byte string with some simple syntax rules. A smart cards that receives an APDU executes the command encoded and returns a response, composed of some data (optional) and a “status word”, that is the result of the operation (OK or an error code).</p>
<p>The APDU syntax is quite easy:</p>
<ul>
<li>byte 1: CLA byte - specifies if the command CLASS, if is an ISO command (00h), a proprietary command (80h) and if the command in signed/encrypted (xCh). Some cards could require special CLASS values in some stages of their life cycles.</li>
<li>byte 2: INS byte - specifies the operation type, i.e. select file, read file, encrypt data…</li>
<li>byte 3,4 : P1 and P2 bytes - specify some parameters of the requested operation, i.e. start offset for a read or update file operation, identifier of a Security Object…</li>
<li>byte 5 (optional) : LC - the length of Data field in bytes. If no data field is present LC can be 0 or absent</li>
<li>bytes 6 - (5+LC) (optional) : Data field - additional data needed to execute the command, i.e. data to be written to a file, or control parameters for a new Security Object</li>
<li>last byte (optional) : LE - the lenght of data expected as response, i.e. the numebr of bytes to read from a file, the length of a random requested to the card</li>
</ul>
<p>According to the presence or absence of Data Field and LE we have 4 cases of apdu:</p>
<ul>
<li>Case 1 : No Data Field, No LE - APDU is 4 bytes long</li>
<li>Case 2 : No Data Field, LE - APDU is 5 bytes long</li>
<li>Case 3 : Data Field, No LE - APDU is 5+LC bytes long</li>
<li>Case 4 : Data Field, LE - APDU is 6+LC bytes long</li>
</ul>
<p>The encoding of the command is very context specific. For this article the document with CIE Functional Specifications provides all supported commands</p>
<p>The response returned by the card has a very simple format:</p>
<ul>
<li>N bytes (optional) : response data (command specific)</li>
<li>last 2 bytes : Status Word</li>
</ul>
<p>The meaning of status words is defined in ISO 7816. Anyway, the use of a particular Status Word in a specific situation is very vendor-specific, so you can never be sure about it. The only universal Status Word is the OK code: 90h 00h</p>
<h2 id="smart-card-file-system--ef-df-bso...">Smart card file system : EF, DF, BSO…</h2>
<p>Many implementations of smart cards (but not all) have a simple file system to organize data stored in memory. This file system is very similar to the one we use on our PC: there are files, directories, and some more. Let’s see which objects we use in smart cards:</p>
<ul>
<li>MF (Master File) : The root directory of the smart card, that contains all other directories and files</li>
<li>DF (Dedicated File) : a directory that can contain other files and objects. The MF is a DF</li>
<li>EF (Elementary File) : a file that contains data. But not necessarily a simple array of bytes, like on PC file system; an EF can contain variable length or fixed length recordes.</li>
<li>BSO (Base Security Object) : that’s where the real difference comes out: a BSO contains data that must  <strong>never</strong>  go out from the card, but are essential for cryptographic operations, like PINs or Private Keys</li>
<li>SE (Security Environment) : A “serivice” object that mantains a reference to the BSO used in some cryptographic operations</li>
</ul>
<p>Our implementation will handle all of these. Some smart card OS could use also other types of objects.</p>
<p>A very peculiar feature of smart card is the use of Access Conditions and Secure Messaging Conditions.<br>
Access Conditions define the conditions that must be met in order to execute a specific operation on an object. An access condition could have the following values:</p>
<ul>
<li>Always (00h) : the operation is free and can always be performed, i.e. read the content of an EF containing the smart card serial</li>
<li>Never (FFh) : the operation con never be performed, i.e. update the content of an EF containing the smart card serial</li>
<li>A reference to a BSO (XXh) : the operation can be performed ONLY if a security test has been performed, i.e. a BSO containig a private RSA key can be used ONLY if the user PIN, in a different BSO (XXh), has been verified</li>
</ul>
<p>Secure Messaging defines the symmetric keys that should be used to encrypt and sign an APDU or its response:</p>
<ul>
<li>No SM (FFh) : the command can be executed with an APDU in clear (CLA = 00h)</li>
<li>A reference to a BSO (XXh) : the command/response should be encrypted using the symmetric key contained in a BSO (XXh)</li>
</ul>
<h2 id="secure-messaging">Secure Messaging</h2>
<p>Secure messagong is a technique used in many smart cards to ensure confidenciality of data passed between the terminal and the card. It simply relies on data encryption and signature to authenticate APDUs and make them unreadable for ana attacker.</p>
<p>Secure Messaging has different implementations, that share the common ground of being based on symmetric keys, but according to the domain there are many specificities.</p>
<p>It’s worth to mention the fact that in some cases, like in Italian CIE on which we are focusing, keys are fixed and stored on the card; In some other cases, like ICAO MRTD application, Secure messaging keys are shared by means of a  <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffie%E2%80%93Hellman_key_exchange">Diffie-Hellman key agreement protocol</a>, and keys are not fixed but dinamically generated at each session. Moreover, ICAO implementation of secure messaging if session-oriented: once SM keys for a session are shared, all commands in that session will be protected by those keys. Instead, in our implementation, secure messaging is object-oriented: Secure messaging must be used to performa a specific action on a specific object, as defined in the object’s Secure Messaging conditions.</p>
<p>Details on rules to encode an APDU in secure messaging can be found on CIE Functional Specification.<br>
Above Info coming from:<br>
<a href="https://www.codeproject.com/Articles/623200/A-Virtual-ISO-SmartCard">https://www.codeproject.com/Articles/623200/A-Virtual-ISO-SmartCard</a></p>

